
=== PAGE 1 ===
PinnDE: Physics-Informed Neural Networks for
Solving Differential Equations
Jason Matthews
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Memorial University of Newfoundland
St. John’s, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada
jbmatthews@mun.caAlex Bihlo
Department of Mathematics and Statistics
Memorial University of Newfoundland
St. John’s, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada
abihlo@mun.ca
Keywords: PinnDE, differential equations, physics-informed neural networks, deep operator net-
works
Abstract
In recent years the study of deep learning for solving differential equations has
grown substantially. The use of physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) and
deep operator networks (DeepONets) have emerged as two of the most useful
approaches in approximating differential equation solutions using machine learning.
Here, we introduce PinnDE, an open-source Python library for solving differential
equations with both PINNs and DeepONets. We give a brief review of both
PINNs and DeepONets, introduce PinnDE along with the structure and usage
of the package, and present worked examples to show PinnDE’s effectiveness in
approximating solutions of systems of differential equations with both PINNs and
DeepONets.
1 Introduction
Powerful numerical algorithms for solving differential equations have been developed for well over
one hundred years [34]. Modern deep learning has been applied and studied through many diverse
fields [12, 39], however the use of deep learning for solving differential equations is a relatively
new field. While the first ideas of these methods were proposed in [20, 21], in [32] the notion of a
physics-informed neural network (PINN) was popularized. Compared to finite difference methods,
finite element methods or finite volume methods that use numerical differentiation for computing
derivatives, using automatic differentiation [3] in deep learning-based approaches provides a meshless
alternative to solving differential equations. While [32] first proposed this for solving forward and
inverse problems, many other variations of differential equations have been demonstrated to be able
to be solved by PINNs. PINNs can not only be used for solving differential equations directly,
the so-called forward problem , they can also be used for parameter identification or learning of
differential equations itself from data, which is referred to as the inverse problem , as discussed
in [26, 33, 45]. Solving fractional differential equations has been proposed and improved upon in the
works of [30, 36]. Integro-differential equations have been shown to be amenable to PINN-based
methods [46] as well. Stochastic differential equations were tackled with only slight variations to
standard PINN architecture [15,44,49]. There has also been some initial work indicating that including
geometric properties of differential equations can improve the numerical solutions obtainable using
physics-informed machine learning, cf. [2, 10].
While there has been much research done on the different variations of differential equations solvable
by PINNs, work on improving the ability of PINNs in general has been a large focus over the past
several years as well. Adaptive methods for collocation point sampling have been a common field of
study, where residual-based adaptive refinement (RAR) is a popular method which has been proposed
Preprint. Under review.arXiv:2408.10011v2  [cs.LG]  26 Aug 2025
=== PAGE 2 ===
and improved upon in the works of [17, 24, 29, 43, 47]. More specific adaptive collocation point have
been used in [37, 42]. Techniques for providing adaptive scaling parameters on the PINN architecture
are developed in [41] and [27]. Meta learning, a method for a neural network learned optimizer to
optimize a PINN as opposed to a hand-crafted optimizer, has been a relatively new area of research
to improve physics-informed machine learning for solving differential equations [4, 23, 31].
While PINNs are the main focus using deep learning for solving differential equations, a second,
more general approach has grown in popularity as a tool for solving differential equations as well.
Deep operator networks (DeepONets), first proposed in [24], provide a general method for solving
differential equations. A key distinction separates PINNs from DeepONets. While a PINN is trained
to approximate the solution function, u(x), for a single instance of a differential equation, a DeepONet
is designed to learn the underlying solution operator, G. The goal is to approximate the mapping
from an input function f(such as the initial condition, boundary conditions, or forcing term) to
the corresponding solution function, such that u(x)≈G(f)(x). This operator learning framework
provides a significant advantage: Once trained, the DeepONet can be evaluated on new, unseen input
functions without requiring retraining, making it highly efficient for solving parametric problems.
Furthermore, the learned operator can be applied sequentially for long time domain predictions. By
using the predicted solution at one time step as the new initial condition for the subsequent step, the
network can perform time-stepping simulations, as demonstrated by [40]. Many different DeepONet
variations have been proposed throughout [16,22,35,38,48] which show progress in the improvement
in this architecture.
The Python machine learning frameworks TensorFlow, PyTorch, and JAX [1, 7, 14] are commonly
used for implementing deep learning algorithms and architecture. Despite this and deep learning for
differential equations becoming popular research fields, there exist few software packages which
implement these ideas using low-code solutions. While existing packages like DeepXDE [25] provide
powerful and flexible frameworks, they often demand significant software development experience.
This results in researchers and educators having to re-create already well-understood implementations
from scratch. Here, we introduce PinnDE, an open-source Python library for solving differential
equations with PINNs and DeepONets implemented in TensorFlow and JAX. PinnDE provides a
user-friendly interface in which only a minimal amount of functions is given to a user. PinnDE also
provides simple to read implementations which we believe gives this package the ability to be used in
education and research effectively, requiring minimal background knowledge on physics-informed
machine learning by its users.
This paper is organized as follows: We briefly discuss the theory behind PINNs and DeepONets in
Section 2, and present a short but self-contained general overview of their implementation. Next,
in Section 3 we introduce PinnDE, providing a summary of the structure of the package with
explanations on its usage. Then, in Section 4 we provide some worked examples of commonly
solved ordinary and partial differential equations using different methods to show the effectiveness of
PinnDE. Finally, Section 5 contains the conclusions and some discussions about further plans for
developing PinnDE.
2 Background
In this section we give a short review of a physics-informed neural network (PINN), deep operator net-
work (DeepONet), and inverse PINNs which are the basis of the algorithms and models implemented
in PinnDE. We then give an overview of current adaptive point sampling strategies and optimization
routines which PinnDE covers.
2.1 Physics-informed neural networks for forward problem
Physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) were first introduced in [20] and were later popularized
when re-introduced in [32]. The general idea consists of taking a deep neural network as a surrogate
approximation for the solution of a system of differential equations. This has the advantage that
derivatives of the neural network approximation to the solution of the system of differential equations
can be computed with automatic differentiation [3] rather than relying on numerical differentiation as
is typically the case for standard numerical methods such as finite difference, finite volume or finite
element methods. As a consequence, physics-informed neural networks are truly meshless methods
as the derivative computations can be done in single points, without relying on the introduction
2
=== PAGE 3 ===
of a computational mesh as is the case for most standard numerical methods. The neural network
surrogate solution is being obtained by solving an optimization problem that involves fitting the
weights and biases of the network. This is done such that at a collection of finitely many (typically
randomly chosen) collocation points a loss function combining the differential equation along with
any supplied initial and/or boundary conditions is minimized. We make this general procedure more
precise in the following.
We consider a general initial–boundary value problem for a system of Lpartial differential equations
over a spatio-temporal domain [t0, tf]×Ω, where Ω⊂Rd,t0∈Rdenotes the initial integration
time, and tf∈Rdenotes the final integration time, given by
∆l(t, x, u (n)) = 0 , l= 1, . . . , L, t ∈[t0, tf], x∈Ω, (1a)
Ili(x, u(ni)|t=t0) = 0 , l i= 1, . . . , L i, x∈Ω, (1b)
Blb(t, x, u (nb)) = 0 , l b= 1, . . . , L b, t∈[t0, tf], x∈∂Ω, (1c)
where tdenotes the time variable and x= (x1, . . . , x d)denotes the tuple of spatial independent
variables. The dependent variables are denoted by u= (u1, . . . , uq), and u(n)denotes the tuple
of all derivatives of the dependent variable with respect to both tandxup to order n. The initial
conditions are represented through the initial value operator I= (I1, . . . ,ILi), and similarly the
boundary conditions are included using the boundary value operator B= (B1, . . . ,BLb).
We denote a deep neural network as Nθwith parameters θ, which includes all the weights and
biases of all layers of the neural network. The goal of a physics-informed neural network is to
learn to interpolate the global solution of the system of differential equations over [t0, tf]×Ωas the
parameterization uθ(t, x) =Nθ(t, x), where uθ(t, x)≈u(t, x). This is done by minimizing the loss
function
L(θ) =L∆(θ) +γiLi(θ) +γbLb(θ), (2)
where γi, γb∈R+are weighting parameters for the individual loss contributions, and we composite
the differential equation, initial value, and boundary value loss, respectively, which are given by
L∆(θ) =1
N∆N∆X
i=1LX
l=1|∆l(ti
∆, xi
∆, uθ
(n)(ti
∆, xi
∆))|2, (3a)
Li(θ) =1
NiNiX
i=1LiX
li=1|Ili(ti
i, xi
i, uθ
(ni)(ti
i, xi
i))|2, (3b)
Lb(θ) =1
NbNbX
i=1LbX
lb=1|Blb(ti
b, xi
b, uθ
(nb)(ti
b, xi
b))|2, (3c)
whereL∆(θ)corresponds to the differential equation loss based on Eqn. (1a),Li(θ)is the initial value
loss stemming from Eqn. (1b), andLb(θ)denotes the boundary value loss derived from Eqn. (1c).
The neural network evaluates the losses over a set of collocation points, where we have {(ti
∆, xi
∆)}N∆
i=1
for the system, {(ti
i, xi
i)}Ni
i=1for the initial values, and {(ti
b, xi
b)}Nb
i=1for the boundary values, with
N∆,NiandNbdenoting the number of differential equation, initial condition and boundary condition
collocation points, respectively.
This method is considered soft-constrained , as the network is forced to learn the initial and boundary
conditions and composite their loss, which is described in [32]. A downside of this approach is
that while the initial and boundary values are known exactly, they will in general not be satisfied
exactly by the learned neural network owing to being enforced only through minimizing the loss
function. An alternative strategy is to hard-constrain the network with the initial and/or boundary
conditions, following what was first proposed in [20], which structures the neural network itself in a
way so that the output of the network automatically satisfies the initial and/or boundary conditions.
As such, only the differential equation loss then has to be minimized and the initial and boundary loss
components in (2)are not required. The general idea of hard-constraining the initial and boundary
conditions is hence to design a suitable ansatz for the neural network surrogate solution that makes
sure that the initial and boundary conditions are exactly satisfied for all values of the trainable neural
network. The precise form of the class of suitable hard constraints depends on the particular form
of the initial and boundary value operators. We show some specific implementations in Section
3
=== PAGE 4 ===
3.1.1. A more formalized discussion can also be found in [9]. For many problems, it has been shown
that hard-constraining the initial and boundary conditions improves the training performance of
neural network based differential equations solvers, and leads to lower overall errors in the obtained
solutions of these solvers, cf. [9]. One notable exception are cases where the solution of a differential
equation is not differentiable everywhere, in which case soft constraints typically outperform hard
constraints, see e.g. [8].
Above we have introduced physics-informed neural networks for systems of partial differential
equations for general initial–boundary value problems. The same method can also be applied for
ordinary differential equations. For ordinary differential equations, both initial value problems and
boundary value problems can be considered.
We first consider a system of Lordinary differential equations over the temporal domain [t0, tf],
∆l(t, u(n)) = 0 , l= 1, . . . , L, t ∈[t0, tf] (4)
where u(n)are the total derivatives with respect to t, and∆lare(m+1)-th order differential functions,
with initial conditions,
Ili(u(ni)|t=t0) = 0 , l i= 1, . . . , L i (5)
where the associated loss function for the physics-informed neural network is represented as the
composite loss of Eqn. (3a)and Eqn. (3b), with ∆landIlicorresponding to Eqn. (4)and Eqn. (5).
One can also consider a boundary value problem with the boundary conditions
Blb(t, u(nb)) = 0 , l b= 1, . . . , L b, t∈ {t0, tf}, (6)
in which case the physics-informed loss function is represented as the composite loss of Eqn. (3a)
and Eqn. (3c), with ∆landBlbcorresponding to Eqn. (4) and Eqn. (6).
Hard constraining these networks follows a similar procedure as described above, with the ini-
tial/boundary values being exactly enforced for all values of the neural network surrogate solution.
We refer to Section 3.1.1 for further details.
2.2 Physics-informed neural networks for inverse problems
Physics-informed neural networks for inverse problems were introduced in [32], and resemble closely
the structure outlined in Section 2.1, and the description of PINN methods in the previous Section
2.1 holds true for inverse PINNs as well. The key distinction is for a deep neural network to learn to
interpolate the global solution of a system of differential equations as well as parameters given in
the system of differential equations. This is done by using experimental data to approximate said
parameters.
In more detail, we consider the same system of partial differential equations described by Eqn. (1),
with the addition of a parameter term
∆l(t, x, u (n), λ) = 0 , l= 1, . . . , L, t ∈[t0, tf], x∈Ω, (7a)
Ili(x, u(ni), λ|t=t0) = 0 , l i= 1, . . . , L i, x∈Ω, (7b)
Blb(t, x, u (nb), λ) = 0 , l b= 1, . . . , L b, t∈[t0, tf], x∈∂Ω, (7c)
where λ= (λ1, . . . , λ p)denotes the tuple of parameters in this system of differential equations, with
all other definitions given in Section 2.1. These parameters may also be functions of the independent
variables, the dependent variables as well as the derivatives of the dependent variables.
In this case, for a neural network Nθwith weights and biases θ, the goal of an inverse PINN is to learn
to interpolate the global solution of the system of differential equations over [t0, tf]×Ωand identify
the values of the parameters of the equations as the parameterization (uθ, λθ) = (Nθ
1, . . . ,Nθ
q+p) =
Nθ(t, x), where uθ(t, x)≈u(t, x), and λθ≈λ.
This is done by adding a loss term for the experimental data to the loss function given by Eqn. (2).
For a system of Lpartial derivative equations, we add the term Ld(θ)given by
Ld(θ) =1
NdNdX
i=1qX
k=1|Nθ
k(ti
d, xi
d)−uk(ti
d, xi
d)|2, (8)
4
=== PAGE 5 ===
where the network is evaluated over the collected data points sampled at the spatio-temporal data
collocation points {(ti
d, xi
d)}Nd
i=1, with Nddenoting the number of data points sampled. For each
of the solution components of the neural network approximation Nθ
k(t, x),k= 1, . . . , q , the mean
squared error between this approximate solution and the experimental data of the underlying true
solution uk(t, x)sampled at the data point locations is computed. In this setting, Nθlearns to not
only obtain a particular solution to a parameterized differential equation but to also fit the parameters
λto the experimental data samples.
2.3 Deep Operator Networks
Deep operator networks (DeepONets) were first introduced in [24] based on theoretical results of [11].
This idea replaces learning of a particular solution of the system of differential equations with learning
the solution operator acting on a specific initial–boundary condition for the system of differential
equations (1). That is, let G(u0)(t, x)be a solution operator for (1)acting on the particular initial
condition u0yielding the solution of the initial–boundary value at the spatio-temporal point (t, x),
i.e.u(t, x) =G(u0)(t, x). That is, in comparison to standard physics-informed neural networks,
deep operator networks require two inputs, the spatio-temporal point where the solution should be
evaluated (this is the same input as for physics-informed neural networks), and the particular initial
(or boundary) condition to which the solution operator should be applied. Since the initial condition
is a function, it first has to be sampled on a finite dimensional subspace to be included into the neural
network. The most prominent way to accomplish this is to sample a finite collection of Nssensor
points {xi}Ns
i=1, xi∈Ωand evaluate the initial condition at those sensor points, yielding the tuple
(u0(x1), . . . , u 0(xNs))that is used as an input for the deep operator network. A similar strategy
is followed for pure boundary value problems. A deep operator network then uses two separate
networks to combine the sampled initial conditions and independent variables. The branch network
processes the initial condition sampled values, and the trunk network processes the independent
variables. In the vanilla deep operator network the output vectors of the two sub-networks are then
combined via a dot product. The output of deep operator network can be expressed as
Gθ(u0(x))(t, x) =Bθ(u0(x1), . . . , u 0(xNs))· Tθ(t, x)
WithBθ= (Bθ
1, . . . ,Bθ
p)representing the output of the branch net and Tθ= (Tθ
1, . . . ,Tθ
p)repre-
senting the output of the trunk net, and pbeing a hyper-parameter. The loss function associated
with these networks is the same as (2)when soft-constrained. Analogously to physics-informed
neural networks, also deep operator networks can be hard-constrained with either standard PINN
hard constraining methods, or further modified methods designed for deep operator networks, cf. [9].
A trained deep operator network thus is a solution interpolant for the solution operator, i.e. Gθ≈G.
These networks come with multiple main benefits. Firstly, these networks can easily replace one initial
(and/or boundary) condition with a new initial (and/or boundary) condition and do not require re-
training. Secondly, as presented in [40], since these networks learn the solution operator corresponding
to an initial condition, they can readily be used for time-stepping for autonomous systems of
differential equations and thus extend to long time intervals and maintain the ability to further predict
the solution, unlike a standard PINN, which typically fails if tf≫t0. A downside of DeepONets is
that they are typically harder to train as PINNs, since not only a single particular solution has to be
interpolated, but the entire solution operator. This also places additional burdens on the computational
hardware required, making DeepONets more expensive to train than PINNs.
2.4 Adaptive point sampling
The loss function described by Eqn. (2)relies on sampled collocation points across the domain of
the system of PDEs. This is most commonly done using a random or quasi-random sample of the
domain. One of the most frequently used sampling strategies is Latin hypercube sampling (LHS) [28]
which is the sampling strategy used in the first paper re-popularizing PINNs [32].
Random sampling methods such as LHS sample collocation points independently of the solution
or domain. While these methods are shown to be effective, methods of sampling collocation points
which take specific solution or domain features into consideration when sampling are known as
adaptive point sampling strategies. This covers a wide spectrum of strategies. Adaptive sampling
strategies may include sampling strategies which add collocation points during training [25], resample
5
=== PAGE 6 ===
the entire collocation point distribution during training [43], or moving certain collocation points
throughout the training process [19].
Frequently used adaptive sampling strategies in PINNs are residual-based adaptive strategies. These
strategies use the PDE residual of collocation points as the factor which informs the sampling strategy.
We give a brief overview of three of these strategies, where more details can be found in [25, 43].
Residual-based adaptive refinement (RAR) [25] is the first of these strategies. The goal of RAR
is to improve the original collocation point distribution by adding points to areas of large PDE
residual. After training for iepochs, a new sample of collocation points is generated. Then the PDE
residual of the new points are calculated, with the npoints with the largest residual added to the
original distribution. Here, i, nare some predetermined number of iterations and collocation points,
respectively.
Residual-based adaptive distribution (RAD) [43] is a strategy in which the entire collocation point
distribution is resampled every iepochs. This is done by first sampling a larger collocation point
sample than the original distribution randomly. Then from this distribution we sample points to the
same size of the original distribution by the probability density function
p(x)∝ϵ(x)
E[ϵ(x)]+c (9)
which is computed for every collocation point x. Here, ϵ(x)refers to the PDE residual, where
ϵ(x) =|∆(x;u(n))|. Hyperparameters k, care chosen based the desired weighting of the probability
distribution function to the collocation points with higher PDE residuals.
Residual-based adaptive refinement with distribution (RAR-D) [43] is based on combining these two
approaches. In this, after every iepochs of training, we add nnew collocation points to the original
distribution, similar to RAR. However, we add points not based on the PDE residual, but determined
by the probability density function described by Eqn. (9).
3 Physics-informed neural networks for differential equations (PinnDE)
Physics-informed neural networks for differential equations (PinnDE) is an open-source library
in Python providing the ability to solve differential equations with both physics-informed neural
networks (PINNs) and deep operator networks (DeepONets). PinnDE is built using TensorFlow [1]
and JAX [7], serving as the backend, two popular software packages for deep learning. Functionality
to provide multiple backend and other deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch for use with
PinnDE is in development and will be added in a future version.
The goal of PinnDE is to provide a user-friendly interface for solving systems of differential equations
which can be easily shared with collaborators even if they do not have experience working with
machine learning in Python. Many alternative packages for solving differential equations with PINNs
or DeepONets, such as DeepXDE [25] and PINA [13], are powerful packages in this field. They
provide a high level of customization and control in how a specific problem is being solved. This
naturally leads to a higher amount of software needing to be written and understood by a user, which
when sharing with collaborators can lead to difficulties if not everyone understands the package
to the same degree. PinnDE is a tool in which we aim to bridge this gap between functionality
and ease-of-use, stripping away complexity from the code resulting in an easy to read interface
non-specialists can understand. This package has users create small, modular objects which represent
components of a differential equation problem, which then requires just minimal interfacing with the
package albeit still being able to have access to a wide range of applications, without the need to do
any low-level manual implementations.
In these next sections we outline the overall structure of PinnDE, providing the current extent of this
packages’ capabilities. We then show how the process of solving a system of differential equations
can be done using PinnDE.
3.1 Overview
Figure 1 shows the data flow of main modules involved in solving a system of differential equations
using PinnDE. Each individual module gives the user a small amount of requirements to specify,
6
=== PAGE 7 ===
all of which are related to the problem specification itself as well as to the basic neural network
architecture and optimization procedure, but as will be demonstrated below still does not take away
from the users’ ability to interact with all further parts of the solution process.
Figure 1: Flow chart of the module structure of PinnDE
A user first initializes the domain of their problem using a single function from the Domain module.
Next, the boundary conditions of the problem are initialized with the Boundaries module. If the
problem is time-dependent and involves initial conditions, the initial conditions are defined using a
single function from the Initials module. Then a single function in the Data module is being called
corresponding to the system of differential equations one wishes to solve. This function call creates a
data object, which is what is passed to a function call in the Model module to create the desired model
to solve the specified differential equations. As a next step one calls the train() on one’s model,
invoking the training routine for the specific problem with desired functionality (hard constraining,
adaptive collocation points, meta-learned adaptivity, etc). Lastly, PinnDE then provides a plotting
module to quickly plot losses and visualization of results on specific dimension equations.
In these next sections we give a brief overview of the domains, boundaries, data, which models and
what adaptive point sampling strategies are currently available in PinnDE, specifying limitations in
implementation if applicable. We only outline the general ability of PinnDE, a full API and tutorials
can be found at https://pinnde.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ .
3.1.1 Domains
The domain module is the first which must be initialized when using PinnDE. Currently we provide
two general types of domains implemented, ddimensional hyper-rectangles and ddimensional
ellipsoids. Both of these domains allow specifying a domain in ddimensions, denoted in PinnDE as
x1, . . . , xd . Both of these have a spatial domain function, as well as a temporal domain counterpart,
which is used when defining a time dependent system of partial differential equations, which allows
the time dimension, denoted tin PinnDE, to be used. This enables solving (1 + d)-dimensional
evolution equations or d-dimensional boundary value problems. We also provide a general API for
boundary functions with the abstract boundaries class, which when implemented allow users to
define custom-domains which will work with the PinnDE architecture.
3.1.2 Initial and Boundaries
TheBoundaries module provides boundary generation functions for ordinary and partial differential
equations. The boundaries currently available to be used for partial differential equations are Periodic ,
Dirichlet , and Neumann . We further provide the boundary ODEicbc , which is designed to be
used to specify initial or boundary conditions for systems of ordinary differential equations. All
boundary functions require a domain to be passed in for which the boundary is being defined.
These boundaries can be specified for any (1 + d)-dimensional system of evolution equations or
d-dimensional boundary value problems. Specific implementation of the boundary values depends on
the domain being described.
PinnDE also offers both soft and hard constraining for a selection of these boundaries in specific
dimensions. The availability of what PinnDE provides is further described in Section 3.1.4 where the
Models of PinnDE are described. Here we give some examples of specific implementations of how
hard constraining of a boundary (temporal or spatial) is done in PinnDE.
7
=== PAGE 8 ===
Periodic boundary conditions over nspatial dimensions (x1, . . . , x n)of a differential equation over
the hyper-rectangle (x1, . . . , x n)∈[xl1, xr1]× ··· × [xln, xrn]are enforced using a coordinate
transform layer in the neural network itself, by using the transform f(xi) = (cos 2 πxi/(xri−
xli),sin 2πxi/(xri−xli))applied to each spatial input xi. See [5] for further details.
For constraining a periodic boundary condition of a (1 + 1) -dimensional PDE in variables (t, x)over
a spatio-temporal domain [t0, tf]×Ω,Ω = [ xl, xr], xl, xr∈R, we only have to hard-constrain the
initial conditions as periodic boundaries can be enforced exactly using a coordinate transform layer
described above. For hard constraining the initial condition itself, we assume that the equation is of
second order in t. Then, we can include the initial condition as a hard constraint in the neural network
surrogate solution uθ(t, x)using the ansatz
uθ(t, x) =u0(x) +∂u
∂t
t=t0(x) (t−t0) +Nθ(t, x)t−t0
tf−t02
,
Where u0and∂u
∂t
t=t0represent the initial conditions at t=t0, andNθ(t, x)is the neural network
output. Multiple variations of possible hard constraining formulas for this problem can be created
which enforce the desired initial conditions. We found this particular hard constraint ansatz to be
effective for many problems we have considered, and it is therefore used in PinnDE as a default
hard constraint. However more hard constraints are available in PinnDE, including custom hard
constraints.
We also present the hard constraint for a two-dimensional Dirichlet boundary-value problem for a
PDE in variables (x, y)over the rectangular domain Ω = [ xl, xr]×[yl, yu], with xl, xr, yl, yu∈R.
The approximate solution uθ(x, y)is given by the equation
uθ(t, x) =A(x, y) +x∗(1−x∗)y∗(1−y∗)Nθ(x, y),
where we have
A(x, y) = (1 −x∗)fxl(y) +x∗fxr(y) + (1 −y∗)[gyl(x)−[(1−x∗)gyl(xl) +x∗gyl(xr)]]
+y∗[gyr(x)−[(1−x∗)gyu(xl) +x∗gyu(xr)]],
where fxl, fxr, gyl, gyurepresent some boundary functions f(xl, y), f(xr, y), g(x, yl), g(x, yu)re-
spectively, and
x∗=x−xl
xr−xl, y∗=y−yl
yu−yl.
This formula enforces the specific boundary conditions for all output values of the neural network.
This is based on what is described in [20] and is the default hard constraint for two-dimensional
spatial problems over a rectangular domain in PinnDE. Other alternative hard constraints do exist in
PinnDE if applicable to the scenario, and the ability for user’s to create custom hard constraints also
exist.
Hard constraints can be designed for general domains, however the particular domain features impact
the hard constraining function, making them cumbersome to design. In PinnDE, we give designed
hard constraints pre-made for the most popular use cases of domain-boundary combinations. We
currently provide built-in hard constraints for rectangular domains. We provide hard constraints in the
following cases: Single ODEs, single (1 + 1) -dimensional PDEs with periodic boundaries, and single
2-dimensional PDEs with periodic and Dirichlet boundaries. However, PinnDE is built for custom
hard constraints to be able to be created and added to the network, allowing for any user-specific hard
constraint to be implemented on the network. In doing this, we cover functionality for most use cases
while still having the possibility for customization for any problem.
3.1.3 Data
TheData module of PinnDE combines and creates sampled collocation points for training. Each
model has its own specific data object, with a time data counterpart to incorporate a time dimension
when training for spatio-temporal equations. The data module always takes the Domain andBound-
aries as arguments. If using a time domain, it also must take in an Initials . Then model specific
information may be passed depending on the specific data being created. For example, DeepONet
data objects need the number of sensor points to sample, and inverse PINN data objects need the
sampled data over the problem domain and all functions being solved for. This is then the final step
before defining the model.
8
=== PAGE 9 ===
3.1.4 Models
PinnDE currently provides the ability to use PINNs and DeepONets for solving systems of differential
equations. For PINNs, we provide standard forward PINNs as well as inverse PINNs for solving
inverse problems. The number of layers and nodes can both be selected within each model function.
The outer and inner activation function used within each model can be chosen by the user as well. The
user also has the choice to either soft or hard constrain the network. We employ multi-layer perceptron
for all neural network solution surrogates, and implement DeepONets using the architecture proposed
in [24]. Both physics-informed neural networks and physics-informed deep operator networks are
trained by minimizing the composite loss function (2)to approximate the solution (or solution
operator) of a system of differential equations. Derivative approximations are computed using
automatic differentiation [3]. Longer time integrations using DeepONets via time-stepping is realized
using the procedure of [40], which iteratively applies the learned solution operator to its own output
to advance the solution for arbitrary time intervals, similar as done in standard numerical methods.
3.1.5 Adaptive
When calling train() on a model from PinnDE, the user is allowed to pass in an adaptive point
sampling strategy created from the Adaptive ’s module. We currently provide three different adaptive
sampling strategies which can be employed without needing to do any manual implementation:
residual-based adaptive refinement, residual-based adaptive distribution, and residual-based adaptive
refinement with distribution (RAR, RAD, RAR-D). These strategies are based on the research reported
in [25, 43], and were shortly summarized in Section 2.4. These strategies can be used with both
forward and inverse PINNs, and can also be applied in combination with L-BFGS optimization.
3.2 Usage
In this section we give the simple outline for how to use PinnDE. We describe what data must be
declared when solving a system of differential equations. We give an example of the standard process
solving a single partial differential equation. The process outline is described in Table 1.
Table 1: Workflow to solve PDE
Step 1 Use the Domain module to define the domain for the independent variables
Step 2 Define the boundary functions as Python lambda functions,
as well as number of sample points to use on boundary
Step 3 Use the Boundaries module to set up the desired boundary
Step 4 Define all initial conditions as Python lambda functions, number of
initial value points, and use the Initials module to set up initial conditions
Step 5 Define the Data object corresponding to the model being used
Step 6 Optionally declare number of layers of network, nodes of network,
and constraint of network to interface with model
Step 7 Define the equation to solve, and use Model module and input data to solve equation
Step 8 Call train(epochs) on returned model to train the network
Step 9 Use trained model to plot data with given functions or take data from class
to use independently
Example code that follows this structure is given in Appendix A, where the code for the following
examples in Section 4 is presented. Many more tutorials are given along with the API in the linked
documentation above.
4 Examples
In this section we present a few short examples of how PinnDE can be used to solve systems
of ordinary differential equations, and systems of partial differential equations using the different
methods implemented in PinnDE. We provide a concise description of each problem and a comparison
of each trained model against the analytical solution or a numerical reference solution obtained using
a standard numerical integrator using the mean squared error as comparison metric. All code for
these examples is provided in Appendix A.
9
=== PAGE 10 ===
4.1 Rigid body
We first consider the Euler equations for the free rigid body [18], a system of ordinary differential equa-
tions, with a physics-informed network which uses soft constrained initial conditions. Specifically,
we solve the system of order ordinary differential equations in angular momentum representation
dw1
dt=I2−I3
I2I3w2w3, (10a)
dw2
dt=I3−I1
I1I3w1w3, (10b)
dw3
dt=I1−I2
I1I2w1w2, (10c)
where w= (w1, w2, w3)is the angular momentum of the rigid body, and I1, I2, I3are the principle
moments of inertia. For this benchmark we use I1= 0.2, I2= 0.3, I3= 0.4, and the initial condition
w= (1,1,1). We solve this initial value problem over the interval t∈[0,2.5].
Figure 2 presents the neural network solution against a numerical solution as well as the time series
of the loss for training the network. The standard numerical reference solution for this problem was
computed using the standard fourth-order Runge–Kutta method. The specific architecture used was a
Figure 2: Solution predicted using a PINN against the numerical solution for the rigid body sys-
tem(10) (left) , the difference of neural network solution and numerical solution (middle) , and the
time series of loss from training the network (right) .
PINN with 4 hidden layers with 60 nodes per layer, using the hyperbolic tangent as activation function,
and Adam and L-BFGS for fine-tuning was chosen as the optimizers. We use 3000 collocation points
across the domain for the network to learn the solution, sampled with Latin hypercube sampling. We
train this network for 20000 epochs using Adam, then 5000 iterations using L-BFGS, implementing
a two-step training routine. The start of L-BFGS optimization during training is highlighted in Fig. 2.
We stop training when the epoch loss converges towards the solution. For the following examples, we
will also train until a minimum loss has been reached.
The code for solving this system of equations can be found in Appendix A.1.
4.2 Lorenz model
We next use PinnDE to solve the Lorenz–1960 model, a system of ordinary differential equations,
with a deep operator network which uses soft-constrained initial conditions. The dynamical system is
dx
dt=kl(1
k2+l2−1
k2)yz, (11a)
dy
dt=kl(1
l2−1
k2+l2)xz, (11b)
dz
dt=kl
2(1
k2−1
l2)xy, (11c)
where in this benchmark we chose k= 2, l= 1, and we choose initial conditions x(0) = 0 .5, y(0) =
0.75, z(0) = 1 . We solve this initial value problem over the interval t∈[0,1].
10
=== PAGE 11 ===
Figure 3 presents the neural network solution against a numerical solution as well as the time series
of the loss for training the network. The standard numerical reference solution for this problem was
computed using the Runge–Kutta method. The specific architecture used was a DeepONet with both
Figure 3: Solution predicted using a DeepONet against the numerical solution for the Lorenz
system (11) (left) , the difference of neural network solution and numerical solution (middle) , and the
time series of loss from training the network (right) .
branch net and trunk net being multi-layer perceptrons having 4 hidden layers with 40 nodes per
layer, using the hyperbolic tangent as activation function, and Adam as the chosen optimizer. We use
3000 collocation points across the domain for the network to learn the solution, sampled with Latin
hypercube sampling. We sample 5000 different initial conditions for the DeepONet’s branch network
in the range of x(0), y(0), z(0)∈[−2,2]. We train this network for 75000 epochs using Adam. This
is when the epoch loss converges towards its minimum.
We further demonstrate the time-stepping ability using a DeepONet in PinnDE in Fig. 4. We time-step
the trained DeepONet for 6 steps, increasing the temporal domain to [0,6], and give the error of the
neural network solution against the corresponding Runge–Kutta numerical solution. The learned
neural network solution operator demonstrates the ability to time-step with a consistently low error.
Figure 4: Time-stepped solution predicted by the trained DeepONet against the numerical reference
solution obtained using a fourth-order Runge–Kutta method for system (11) (left) , the difference of
neural network solution and numerical solution (right) .
The code for solving this system of equations can be found in Appendix A.2.
4.3 Dam break problem
We next use PinnDE to solve the classical one-dimensional dam break problem with flat bottom
topography for the shallow-water equations. We use soft-constrained initial conditions and Dirichlet
11
=== PAGE 12 ===
boundary conditions. Specifically, we solve the one-dimensional shallow water equations given by
∂h
∂t+∂(hu)
∂x= 0, (12a)
∂(hu)
∂t+∂
∂x
hu2+1
2gh2
= 0, (12b)
where h(t, x)represents the fluid depth and u(t, x)represents the fluid velocity. The analytical
solution for this problem is given by
gha(t, x) =

a2
0 ifx−x0<−a0t
1
9(2a0−(x−x0)/t)2if−a0t < x−x0<2a0t
0 ifx−x0>2a0t
ua(t, x) =

0 ifx−x0<−a0t
2
3(a0+ (x−x0)/t)2if−a0t < x−x0<2a0t
0 ifx−x0>2a0t
where a0=√gh0, see [6] for further details. This analytical solution gives the initial and boundary
conditions. In this benchmark, we use initial parameters h0= 0.75, x0=−0.25, and we set g= 1.
We consider this benchmark over the spatio-temporal domain (t, x)∈[0.01,1]×[−π, π]. We
compare the neural network solution to the analytical solution for both h(t, x)andh(t, x)u(t, x)in
Figure 5.
Figure 5: Solution predictions using a PINN for the dam break problem (12) (left) , the analytical
solution (middle) , and the difference between them (right) .Top: Water height h(t, x).Bottom:
Momentum h(t, x)u(t, x).
For this example we used a PINN with 4 hidden layers with 60 nodes per layer, the hyperbolic tangent
activation function, and trained the neural network using the Adam optimizer. A total of 1000 initial
value collocation points were used for the network to learn the initial condition, 2000 boundary
collocation points, and 15000 collocation points were used across the spatio-temporal domain for the
network to learn the solution, both sampled using Latin hypercube sampling. The minimum of the
loss was reached after 35000 epochs of training.
The code for solving this equation can be found in Appendix A.3.
12
=== PAGE 13 ===
4.4 Burgers’ equation
We next use PinnDE to solve Burgers’ equation with a PINN which uses soft-constrained initial
and boundary conditions. We solve this equation using periodic boundary values. We also use a
residual-based adaptive distribution (RAD) adaptive sampling strategy. In particular, we consider
∂u
∂t+u∂u
∂x−ν∂2u
∂x2= 0, ν =0.01
π. (13)
We solve this equation over the square domain (t, x)∈[0,1]×[−1,1]. We compare the neural
network solution to a numerical reference solution in Figure 6. The numerical reference solution
uses a spectral discretization in space combined with the method of lines based on the Runge–Kutta
integrator for time-stepping. For this example we used a PINN with 4 hidden layers with 60 nodes
Figure 6: Solution predicted using a PINN for Burgers’ equation (13) (left) , the numerical reference
solution (middle) , and the mean squared error between them (right) .
per layer, the hyperbolic tangent activation function, and trained the neural network using a two
step training routine. The Adam optimizer was used to train the network for 5000 epochs. A total
of 400 initial value collocation points were used for the network to learn the initial condition, and
2000 collocation points were used across the spatial domain for the network to learn the solution, all
sampled using Latin hypercube sampling.
We used residual-based adaptive distribution (RAD) to train this equation. This strategy resamples
the distribution of collocation points during training to align with areas of larger PDE residual. For
Burgers’ equation, this is particularly effective as we have a steep developing shock which to resolve
requires locally more collocation points. We resample the distribution after 3000 epochs of training.
We sample 10000 collocation points across the domain, and sample 2000 new collocation points from
the probability distribution function described in Section 2.4, with hyperparameters k= 3, c= 0.
We compare these points in Fig. 7.
Figure 7: Original collocation points sampled using Latin hypercube sampling (right) and the
resampled distribution by RAD (left) .
13
=== PAGE 14 ===
The code for solving this equation can be found in Appendix A.4.
4.5 Heat Equation
For our next example we use PinnDE to solve the (1 + 2) -dimensional linear heat equation with a
DeepONet which uses soft-constrained initial and boundary conditions, meaning we use a composite
loss function consisting of the PDE, initial condition, and boundary condition losses. We solve this
equation with Dirichlet boundary values. Specifically, we consider the equation
∂u
∂t=ν∂2u
∂x2+∂2u
∂y2
, ν = 0.15, (14a)
with initial condition
u0(x, y) = sin πxsinπy, (14b)
and with Dirichlet boundary conditions
u(t, x, y ) = 0 ∀(t, x, y )∈ {[0,1]×R2|x2+y2= 1} (14c)
We solve this equation over the time interval t∈[0,1], on the spatial domain of the unit circle
(x, y)∈ {R2|x2+y2<1}. We compare the neural network solution to the analytical solution
u(t, x, y ) = exp( νπ2t) sinπxsinπyin Figure 8.
Figure 8: Solution predicted by DeepONet for the heat equation (14) (left) , the analytical solution
(middle) , and the mean squared error between them (right) .
For this example we trained a DeepONet with both branch net and trunk net being multi-layer
perceptrons having 4 hidden layers with 60 nodes per layer, using the hyperbolic tangent activation
function. We use Adam as our chosen optimizer. 600 initial value points were used to be sampled
along t= 0for the network to learn the initial condition. The soft-constrained boundary was sampled
using 600 boundary value points for the neural network to learn the boundary conditions, and 12000
collocation points were used across the domain for the network to learn the solution itself, both
sampled with Latin hypercube sampling. We sample a total of 1000 initial conditions from a class of
truncated Fourier series with random coefficients to learn the solution operator. After training on this
class of initial conditions, the operator network can be evaluated in a simple inference step for new
initial conditions from the same initial condition class, an example of which is shown in Figure 8. We
note here that different classes of initial conditions, such as Gaussian random fields [24] could be
considered as well for operator learning, and will be implemented in PinnDE in the future. We train
this network for 4000 epochs which is when the minimum loss is reached
The code for solving this equation can be found in Appendix A.5.
4.6 Inverse linear advection speed
We lastly use PinnDE to solve for an unknown advection speed in the linear advection equation with
an inverse PINN which uses a soft-constrained initial condition. We use periodic boundary conditions,
which in PinnDE are implemented at the neural network level as a hard constraint to imposes periodic
boundaries on the independent spatial variable x. We also use a residual-based adaptive refinement
with distribution (RAR-D) adaptive sampling strategy. The linear advection with variable advection
speed for our reference solution data is c= sin( πx), and the equation is described as
∂u
∂t+c∂u
∂x= 0, (15a)
14
=== PAGE 15 ===
where we use the initial condition
u0(x) = cos πx. (15b)
We solve this equation over the interval t∈[0,1], on the spatial domain x∈[−1,1]. We compare the
neural network solution to a numerical calculation of the solution in Figure 9, showing the success of
the trained model, as it gives small point-wise and overall mean-squared errors, respectively. We use
a numerical solution here as no analytical solution for this equation exists.
Figure 9: Solution predictions using a PINN for the inverse linear advection speed problem (15)
(left) , the numerical solution (middle) , and the difference between them (right) .Top:u(t, x).Bottom:
Advection velocity c= sin( πx).
For this example we used a PINN with 4 hidden layers with 60 nodes per layer, the hyperbolic
tangent activation function, and trained the neural network using the Adam optimizer. A total of
200 initial value collocation points were used for the network to learn the initial condition, and 1000
collocation points were used across the spatio-temporal domain for the network to learn the solution,
both sampled using Latin hypercube sampling. We also sampled 500 points across the spatio-temporal
domain over which we evaluate the analytical solution uas data points. These data points are then
used to learn the advection speed c. Our RAR-D sampling strategy added 30 collocation points
every 250 epochs, with hyper-parameters k= 3, c= 0(see [43] for more details). The evolution of
collocation points throughout training is shown in Fig. 10. The minimum of the loss was reached
after 5000 epochs of training.
The code for solving this equation can be found in Appendix A.6.
5 Conclusion
Deep learning-based approaches for solving differential equations have become an increasingly
popular alternative for solving differential equations compared to methods based around numerical
differentiation such as finite element methods, finite volume methods, and finite difference methods.
PINNs and DeepONets are two methodologies of this deep learning-based approach. With these, we
have a naturally meshless alternative to any of the classical numerical methods mentioned above. Deep
learning-based approaches have the ability to use automatic differentiation to compute derivatives,
without the need for any numerical discretizations to approximate derivatives. This streamlines the
application of these methods across arbitrary domains, and by being able to incorporate physical
15
=== PAGE 16 ===
Figure 10: Original collocation points before training (left) , the collocation points halfway through
training at epoch 2500 (middle) , and the final set of collocation points after 5000 epochs (right) .
constraints into the solving procedure, allow for them to solve problems in which classic numerical
methods may struggle.
In this paper we presented PinnDE, an open-source software package in Python for PINN and
DeepONet implementations for solving ordinary and partial differential equations. We reviewed the
methodologies behind physics-informed neural networks for both forward and inverse problems, the
DeepONet approach to operator learning, and adaptive point sampling strategies. We then introduced
PinnDE and its functionality, and finally presented several worked examples to show the effectiveness
of this package.
Software packages giving the ability to use physics-informed machine learning approaches are
becoming increasingly popular. In contrast to other existing packages, PinnDE stresses simplicity
and requires minimal coding from the side of the user, thus alleviating the need of writing significant
amounts of software to support the higher level of customization that other packages offer, while
still providing many of the abilities that alternative packages offer. As such, PinnDE provides a
simple interface where users with little experience can still write and understand the implementation
of software written in this package. This gives researchers the ability to use this package with
collaborators outside of the field who may be interested in this area of research but are lacking the
skills to use more advanced packages. PinnDE also provides a tool for educators to use as the simple
implementations give a low barrier of entry to new users. We also hope that by providing a package
with such quick implementations of problems will promote further research and development of the
field of scientific machine learning.
PinnDE is continuously being developed to integrate new advancements in research surrounding
PINNs and DeepONets, while aiming to maintain a straightforward user experience. Some possible
additions which will be implemented in future versions are more adaptive collocation point methods,
other variants on DeepONet and PINN architectures, meta-learned optimization, the availability of
different backend, and general geometries which differential equations can be solved over.
All code and link to documentation with guides can be found at: https://github.com/
JB55Matthews/PinnDE
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This research was undertaken thanks to funding from the Canada Research Chairs program and the
NSERC Discovery Grant program.
Author Contributions
Jason Matthews: Writing - original draft, Writing - review & editing, software, conceptualization,
methodology, visualization. Alex Bihlo: Writing - review & editing, conceptualization, methodology,
resources, supervision, funding acquisition.
16
=== PAGE 17 ===
References
[1]Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, Craig Citro,
Greg S. Corrado, Andy Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow,
Andrew Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefowicz, Lukasz Kaiser,
Manjunath Kudlur, Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Rajat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek
Murray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, Kunal
Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Vanhoucke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Viégas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete
Warden, Martin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-
scale machine learning on heterogeneous systems, 2015. Software available from tensorflow.org.
[2]Shivam Arora, Alex Bihlo, and Francis Valiquette. Invariant physics-informed neural networks
for ordinary differential equations. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25:1–24, 2024.
[3]Atilim Gunes Baydin, Barak A Pearlmutter, Alexey Andreyevich Radul, and Jeffrey Mark
Siskind. Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey. Journal of machine learning
research , 18(153):1–43, 2018.
[4]Alex Bihlo. Improving physics-informed neural networks with meta-learned optimization.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 25(14):1–26, 2024.
[5]Alex Bihlo and Roman O Popovych. Physics-informed neural networks for the shallow-water
equations on the sphere. Journal of Computational Physics , 456:111024, 2022.
[6]Onno Bokhove. Flooding and drying in discontinuous Galerkin finite-element discretizations of
shallow-water equations. Part 1: one dimension. Journal of Scientific Computing , 22(1):47–82,
2005.
[7]James Bradbury, Roy Frostig, Peter Hawkins, Matthew James Johnson, Chris Leary, Dougal
Maclaurin, George Necula, Adam Paszke, Jake VanderPlas, Skye Wanderman-Milne, and Qiao
Zhang. JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 2018.
[8]Rüdiger Brecht, Elsa Cardoso-Bihlo, and Alex Bihlo. Physics-informed neural networks for
tsunami inundation modeling. Journal of Computational Physics , page 114066, 2025.
[9]Rüdiger Brecht, Dmytro R Popovych, Alex Bihlo, and Roman O Popovych. Improving physics-
informed DeepONets with hard constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07899 , 2023.
[10] Elsa Cardoso-Bihlo and Alex Bihlo. Exactly conservative physics-informed neural networks
and deep operator networks for dynamical systems. Neural Networks , 181:106826, 2025.
[11] Tianping Chen and Hong Chen. Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural
networks with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems. IEEE
transactions on neural networks , 6(4):911–917, 1995.
[12] KR1442 Chowdhary and KR Chowdhary. Natural language processing. Fundamentals of
artificial intelligence , pages 603–649, 2020.
[13] Dario Coscia, Anna Ivagnes, Nicola Demo, and Gianluigi Rozza. Physics-informed neural
networks for advanced modeling. Journal of Open Source Software , 8(87):5352, 2023.
[14] William Falcon and The PyTorch Lightning team. Pytorch lightning, 2019.
[15] Ling Guo, Hao Wu, and Tao Zhou. Normalizing field flows: Solving forward and inverse
stochastic differential equations using physics-informed flow models. Journal of Computational
Physics , 461:111202, 2022.
[16] Patrik Simon Hadorn. Shift-deeponet: Extending deep operator networks for discontinuous
output functions, 2022.
[17] John M Hanna, Jose V Aguado, Sebastien Comas-Cardona, Ramzi Askri, and Domenico
Borzacchiello. Residual-based adaptivity for two-phase flow simulation in porous media using
physics-informed neural networks. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering ,
396:115100, 2022.
[18] Darryl D Holm, Tanya Schmah, and Cristina Stoica. Geometric mechanics and symmetry: from
finite to infinite dimensions , volume 12. Oxford University Press, 2009.
[19] Jie Hou, Ying Li, and Shihui Ying. Enhancing pinns for solving pdes via adaptive collocation
point movement and adaptive loss weighting. Nonlinear Dynamics , 111(16):15233–15261,
2023.
17
=== PAGE 18 ===
[20] Isaac E Lagaris, Aristidis Likas, and Dimitrios I Fotiadis. Artificial neural networks for solving
ordinary and partial differential equations. IEEE transactions on neural networks , 9(5):987–
1000, 1998.
[21] Isaac E Lagaris, Aristidis C Likas, and Dimitris G Papageorgiou. Neural-network methods for
boundary value problems with irregular boundaries. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks ,
11(5):1041–1049, 2000.
[22] Jae Yong Lee, Sung Woong Cho, and Hyung Ju Hwang. HyperDeepONet: learning operator
with complex target function space using the limited resources via hypernetwork. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.15949 , 2023.
[23] Xu Liu, Xiaoya Zhang, Wei Peng, Weien Zhou, and Wen Yao. A novel meta-learning initial-
ization method for physics-informed neural networks. Neural Computing and Applications ,
34(17):14511–14534, 2022.
[24] Lu Lu, Pengzhan Jin, and George Em Karniadakis. Deeponet: Learning nonlinear operators for
identifying differential equations based on the universal approximation theorem of operators.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03193 , 2019.
[25] Lu Lu, Xuhui Meng, Zhiping Mao, and George Em Karniadakis. DeepXDE: A deep learning
library for solving differential equations. SIAM Review , 63(1):208–228, 2021.
[26] Lu Lu, Raphael Pestourie, Wenjie Yao, Zhicheng Wang, Francesc Verdugo, and Steven G
Johnson. Physics-informed neural networks with hard constraints for inverse design. SIAM
Journal on Scientific Computing , 43(6):B1105–B1132, 2021.
[27] Levi D McClenny and Ulisses M Braga-Neto. Self-adaptive physics-informed neural networks.
Journal of Computational Physics , 474:111722, 2023.
[28] Michael D McKay, Richard J Beckman, and William J Conover. A comparison of three
methods for selecting values of input variables in the analysis of output from a computer code.
Technometrics , 42(1):55–61, 2000.
[29] Mohammad Amin Nabian, Rini Jasmine Gladstone, and Hadi Meidani. Efficient training
of physics-informed neural networks via importance sampling. Computer-Aided Civil and
Infrastructure Engineering , 36(8):962–977, 2021.
[30] Guofei Pang, Lu Lu, and George Em Karniadakis. fPINNs: Fractional physics-informed neural
networks. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 41(4):A2603–A2626, 2019.
[31] Apostolos F Psaros, Kenji Kawaguchi, and George Em Karniadakis. Meta-learning PINN loss
functions. Journal of computational physics , 458:111121, 2022.
[32] Maziar Raissi, Paris Perdikaris, and George E Karniadakis. Physics-informed neural networks:
A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial
differential equations. Journal of Computational physics , 378:686–707, 2019.
[33] Maziar Raissi, Alireza Yazdani, and George Em Karniadakis. Hidden fluid mechanics: Learning
velocity and pressure fields from flow visualizations. Science , 367(6481):1026–1030, 2020.
[34] Carl Runge. Über die numerische Auflösung von Differentialgleichungen. Mathematische
Annalen , 46:167–178, 1895.
[35] Jacob Seidman, Georgios Kissas, Paris Perdikaris, and George J Pappas. NOMAD: Nonlinear
manifold decoders for operator learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
35:5601–5613, 2022.
[36] Sivalingam SM, Pushpendra Kumar, and V Govindaraj. A novel optimization-based physics-
informed neural network scheme for solving fractional differential equations. Engineering with
Computers , 40(2):855–865, 2024.
[37] Kejun Tang, Xiaoliang Wan, and Qifeng Liao. Adaptive deep density approximation for
Fokker–Planck equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 457:111080, 2022.
[38] Simone Venturi and Tiernan Casey. SVD perspectives for augmenting DeepONet flexibility and
interpretability. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 403:115718, 2023.
[39] Athanasios V oulodimos, Nikolaos Doulamis, Anastasios Doulamis, and Eftychios Protopa-
padakis. Deep learning for computer vision: A brief review. Computational intelligence and
neuroscience , 2018(1):7068349, 2018.
18
=== PAGE 19 ===
[40] Sifan Wang and Paris Perdikaris. Long-time integration of parametric evolution equations with
physics-informed deeponets. Journal of Computational Physics , 475:111855, 2023.
[41] Sifan Wang, Yujun Teng, and Paris Perdikaris. Understanding and mitigating gradient flow
pathologies in physics-informed neural networks. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing ,
43(5):A3055–A3081, 2021.
[42] Colby L Wight and Jia Zhao. Solving Allen-Cahn and Cahn-Hilliard equations using the
adaptive physics informed neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.04542 , 2020.
[43] Chenxi Wu, Min Zhu, Qinyang Tan, Yadhu Kartha, and Lu Lu. A comprehensive study of non-
adaptive and residual-based adaptive sampling for physics-informed neural networks. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering , 403:115671, 2023.
[44] Liu Yang, Dongkun Zhang, and George Em Karniadakis. Physics-informed generative adver-
sarial networks for stochastic differential equations. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing ,
42(1):A292–A317, 2020.
[45] Jeremy Yu, Lu Lu, Xuhui Meng, and George Em Karniadakis. Gradient-enhanced physics-
informed neural networks for forward and inverse PDE problems. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering , 393:114823, 2022.
[46] Lei Yuan, Yi-Qing Ni, Xiang-Yun Deng, and Shuo Hao. A-PINN: Auxiliary physics informed
neural networks for forward and inverse problems of nonlinear integro-differential equations.
Journal of Computational Physics , 462:111260, 2022.
[47] Shaojie Zeng, Zong Zhang, and Qingsong Zou. Adaptive deep neural networks methods for
high-dimensional partial differential equations. Journal of Computational Physics , 463:111232,
2022.
[48] Etienne Zeudong, Elsa Cardoso-Bihlo, and Alex Bihlo. Low-rank adaptive physics-informed
HyperDeepONets for solving differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18346 , 2025.
[49] Dongkun Zhang, Lu Lu, Ling Guo, and George Em Karniadakis. Quantifying total uncertainty in
physics-informed neural networks for solving forward and inverse stochastic problems. Journal
of Computational Physics , 397:108850, 2019.
A Appendix
Here we provide the code corresponding to the examples presented in Sections [4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5,
4.6].
A.1 Rigid body code
The following is the code being used in Section 4.1.
import src.pinnde as p
import numpy as np
re = p.domain.NRect(1, [0], [2.5])
cond = p.boundaries.odeicbc(tre, [[1], [1], [1]], "ic")
dat = p.data.pinndata(tre, cond, 3000, 300)
eqns = ["(-5/6)*u2*u3 - u1x1", "(5/2)*u1*u3 - u2x1",
"(-5/3)*u1*u2 -u3x1"]
mymodel = p.models.pinn(dat, eqns)
mymodel.train(20000)
mymodel.train(5000, opt="lbfgs")
19
=== PAGE 20 ===
A.2 Lorenz model code
The numerical results presented in Section 4.2 are obtained from the following code.
import pinnde.legacy.ode_Solvers as ode_Solvers
eqn1 = "(-1.6)*x*y - ut"
eqn2 = "0.1*u*y - xt"
eqn3 = "0.75*u*x - yt"
eqns = [eqn1, eqn2, eqn3]
orders = [1, 1, 1]
inits = [[0.5], [0.75], [1]]
t_bdry = [0,1]
N_pde = 500
sensor_range = [-2, 2]
num_sensors = 3000
epochs = 75000
mymodel = ode_Solvers.solveODE_DeepONetSystem_IVP(eqns, orders,
inits, t_bdry, N_pde, sensor_range, num_sensors, epochs)
mymodel.timeStep(6)
mymodel.plot_epoch_loss()
mymodel.plot_solution_prediction()
A.3 Dam break problem code
To obtain the results presented in Section 4.3, the following code can be used.
import pinnde as p
import numpy as np
import tensorflow as tf
h_analytical = lambda t, x: tf.where(x+0.25<-0.5*t, 0.5**2,
tf.where(x+0.25<1*t, (1-(x+0.25)/t)**2/(9), 0.0))
u_analytical = lambda t, x: tf.where(x+0.25<-0.5*t, 0.0,
tf.where(x+0.25<1*t, 2/3*(0.5+(x+0.25)/t), 0.0))
h_init = lambda x: tf.where(x+0.25<-0.5*0.75, 0.5**2,
tf.where(x+0.25<1*0.75, (1-(x+0.25)/0.75)**2/(9), 0.0))
u_init = lambda x: tf.where(x+0.25<-0.5*0.75, 0.0,
tf.where(x+0.25<1*0.75, 2/3*(0.5+(x+0.25)/0.75), 0.0))
tre = p.domain.Time_NRect(1, [-np.pi], [np.pi], [0.01, 1])
bound = p.boundaries.dirichlet(tre, [h_analytical])
inits = p.initials.initials(tre, [[h_init], [u_init]])
dat = p.data.timepinndata(tre, bound, inits, 15000, 2000, 1000)
eqn1 = "u1*u2t + u1t*u2 + 2*u1*u2*u2x1 + u1x1*u2**2 + u1*u1x1"
eqn2 = "u1t + u1*u2x1 + u1x1*u2"
mymodel = p.models.pinn(dat, [eqn1, eqn2])
mymodel.train(35000)
20
=== PAGE 21 ===
A.4 Burgers’ equation code
Here is the code which provides the results presented in Section 4.4.
import pinnde as p
import numpy as np
import tensorflow as tf
tre = p.domain.Time_NRect(1, [-1], [1], [0,1])
bound = p.boundaries.periodic(tre)
inits = p.initials.initials(tre, [lambda x: -np.sin(np.pi*x)])
dat = p.data.timepinndata(tre, bound, inits, 2000, 600, 400)
mymodel = p.models.pinn(dat, ["ut+u*ux1-(0.01/np.pi)*ux1x1"])
rad = p.adaptives.RAD(3000, 3, 0, 5)
mymodel.train(5000)
A.5 Heat equation code
The numerical results presented in Section 4.5 are obtained from the following code.
import pinnde as p
import numpy as np
import tensorflow as tf
center = [0.5, 0.5]
semilengths = [0.5, 0.5]
timerange = [0, 1]
dom = p.domain.Time_NEllipsoid(2, center, semilengths, timerange)
bdryfunc = lambda t, x1, x2: 0+t*0
bound = p.boundaries.dirichlet(tre, [bdryfunc])
u0func = lambda x1, x2: tf.sin(np.pi*x1)*tf.sin(np.pi*x2)
inits = p.initials.initials(dom, [u0func])
dat = p.data.timedondata(dom, bound, inits, 12000, 600, 600, 1000)
eqn = "0.15*ux1x1 + 0.15*ux2x2 - ut"
mymodel = p.models.deeponet(dat, [eqn])
mymodel.train(4000)
A.6 Inverse linear advection equation code
The numerical results presented in Section 4.6 are obtained from the following code.
import src.pinnde as p
import numpy as np
import tensorflow as tf
from scipy.integrate import odeint
from scipy.fftpack import diff as psdiff
from scipy.interpolate import RegularGridInterpolator
c = lambda x: tf.sin(np.pi*x)
u0 = lambda x: tf.cos(np.pi*x)
# Creating reference solution
21
=== PAGE 22 ===
t = np.linspace(0, 1, 200)
x = np.linspace(-1, 1, 200)
c_val = c(x)
def la(u, t, L):
ux = psdiff(u, period=L)
ut = -c_val*ux
return ut
def solve_la(u0, t, L):
sol = odeint(la, u0, t, args=(L,))
return sol
ureference = solve_la(u0(x), t, 2)
uinterp = RegularGridInterpolator((t, x), ureference,
method=’linear’)
N_data = 500
xdata = np.random.uniform(-1, 1, N_data)
tdata = np.random.uniform(0, 1, N_data)
data = np.column_stack([tdata, xdata])
udata = uinterp(data)
timerange = [0, 1]
tre = p.domain.Time_NRect(1, [-1], [1], timerange)
bound = p.boundaries.periodic(tre)
u0func = lambda x1: tf.cos(np.pi*x1)
inits = p.initials.initials(tre, [u0])
dat = p.data.timeinvpinndata(tre, bound, inits, [tdata, xdata],
[udata], 1000, 10, 200)
eqn = "ut+c*ux1"
mymodel = p.models.invpinn(dat, [eqn], ["c"])
rard = p.adaptives.RARD(250, 30, k=3, c=0)
mymodel.train(5000, adapt_pt=rard)
22